---
title: "Thoughts on OCD (Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder)"
date: 2025-02-10
mathjax: true
toc: true
categories:
  - Biology
tags:
  - Biology
---

## Introduction

This post contains information concerning obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD), medications usually prescribed to treat OCD, their chemical structures and physiological mechanism of action. 

---

## Motivation

When I reflect over the past three or four years after the COVID-19 pandemic, I realize that I have often felt anxious and restless. There were times when I had the urge to do something, yet I didn’t know exactly what I should be doing, which made me even more anxious. Many of my college freshman peers, especially those who worked diligently in high school, have told me that they've felt the same way. 

I've also been told that I pay extreme attention to the hygienic state of my hands—so much so that people around me say I’m overly concerned about it. I actually know this myself. When I study, if I feel that my hands are dirty, I find it difficult to concentrate. That’s why I always make sure to wash my hands thoroughly before sitting down to study.

Apparently, all of these behaviors are somewhat related to symptoms for a condition called "obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)." The constant feeling that I must be doing something, the anxiety that arises when I am not, and the fear of falling behind if I don’t push myself hard enough—all stem from excessive fixation. Of course, I strongly believe in managing my time efficiently and using it wisely for self-improvement. Rest is undoubtedly important in life, but I see a vast difference between taking a break and wasting time.

However, when this belief turns into excessive obsession and stress, it becomes a problem. Likewise, while I can acknowledge the discomfort of not being able to wash my hands, it would be problematic if I were to think, “I must wash my hands at all costs, or I won’t be able to do what I have to do.”

What exactly is OCD, and how can it be treated?
